---
title:  "sci-fi books"
date: 2023-08-25
---


i've been reading sci-fi since i was a teenager, and have been recently inspired to put together a list of my favorites and anti-favorites after seeing [noah smith's](https://www.noahpinion.blog/p/underrated-sci-fi-and-fantasy-books) and [andrej karpathy's](https://karpathy.ai/books.html) lists. some caveats / rules:
1. i've limited myself to a single book per author on this list (or a single series), in the interest of brevity
2. this list includes books that i read quite a while ago, and it's entirely possible that if i re-read them now, my opinion would be different
3. i've focused this list of books that i either really liked, and ones i really disliked despite their popularity. i.e. you won't see too many 3/5s on this list because they're just meh and not worth mentioning.
4. no (or at least minimal) spoilers (which also means i have to be a bit vague in the descriptions)


## forever war by joe haldeman [5/5]
a brilliant allegory for the vietman war (author is a vet), but even if you ignore that, just an awesome sci fi story. the best use of special relativity as a literary device that i've seen yet.

## deepness in the sky by verner vinge [5/5]
easily in my top 3. what a god damned book. it's like 3 stories that are perfectly intertwined, and all of them are compelling. enjoyed it more than fire upon the deep, though that one is quite good as well.

## permutation city by greg egan [5/5]
five pages in, my mind was already blown. not a particularly huge fan of the characters, but the ideas in this book are truly thought provoking.

## contact by carl sagan [5/5]
watched the movie when i was 13 and was disappointed that it wasn't like star wars. read the book a few years later and it blew my mind. watched move again afterwards, and loved it as well.

## ubik by phillip k. dick [5/5]
who doesn't love dick? hard to pick a favorite, but i'll go with ubik just because i haven't seen this particular flavor of sci fi explored as much. honorable mentions: a scanner darkly, do androids dream of electric sheep. honorable mentions of dick books i disliked: flow my tears the policeman said, man in the high castle.

## ender's game by orson scott card [5/5]
can't go wrong with this one. trigger warning: the story in volves a mix of children and violence, which can be a bit uncomfortable. do NOT google anything about this book, or you'll easily have it spoiled. the sequel, speaker for the dead, is almost equally praised, but i hated it.

## project hail mary by andy weir [5/5]
really hard not to spoil this one, but i was absolutely giddy reading it. every time i started thinking "oooh, but what about XYZ, isn't that a plot hole", the plot would address XYZ. it's similar in style to the martian, but more in the speculative sci fi vein, which i'm personally more into. the writing is a bit corny at times, but no one's perfect.

## the expanse books {7,8,9} by james s. a. corey [{4,5,5}/5]
watched the show (took a couple of restarts to get into it, but once into it, easily favorite sci fi show of all time). the show stopped at book 6 (not ideal obviously, but there's a 30 year gap between books 6 and 7, so it was an "OK" stopping point). i didn't have the patience to read all 6 books, and wanted to know how it all ends, so i just read some summaries (which sounded pretty darn close to the show), and dove into book 7. book 7 was a bit underwhelming, though i enjoyed revisiting the characters. book 8 is fucking bananas, in a good way. book 9 is excellent as well, and wraps things up nicely. still think about the ending every now and then. some people consider this series "pulp", and i honestly don't get why.

## spin [4/5]
the first book in the series is really enjoyable. the two sequels are a bit meh.

## children of time by adrian tchaikovsky [4/5]
this is a darling of r/printSF, and while i generally enjoyed it, i thought one of the plot lines (the one with the humans) was a bit weak... the characters were underdeveloped. it's possible that i was too harsh on this book because i read it shortly after reading deepness in the sky, which i adored and *on the surface level* has some similarities, so it put this book in its shadow. i haven't read the sequels yet, but very well might.

## blindsight by peter watts [2/5]
this is also a darling of r/printSF. i hated it. forced myself to get to the end. there are some interesting ideas in there, but it's just incredibly poorly written in my opnion -- plot holes, characters with nonsensical motivation, deus ex machina twists at the very end, and a lot of nihilism.

## three body problem by liu cixin [2/5]
yet another darling of r/printSF, and is generally super popular. perhaps it's because there's something lost in translation, or because the book was just incredibly overhyped, i was extremely disappointed. as with blindsight, clearly some interesting ideas (though, honeslty, i had seen many of them before in various other books), a provacotive set up, but overall extremely nihilistic and a joyless affair.

## neuromancer by william gibson [1/5]
i have no idea why people like this book. it may very well have been revolutionary when it was written, but it's so dated now, it made barely any sense.




